IGN Code-foo Application

Question 1:
How many ping pong balls would it take to fill an average sized school bus?

This question gets asked a lot with only tiny variations. My first thought is to find the dimensions of a ping pong ball and of an average sized school bus. Ping-pong balls are sports equipment and as such they have a standard dimension to which they must adhere. A simple google search should yield this dimension. School buses are more flexible in their dimensions, but a google search for school bus dimensions should turn up adequate results. From my high school days I recall my school bus holding around 48 people, which I will consider average for this. I also recall the bus length (I believe it was 56 feet) being marked on it, but I would check this number before using it.

For the ping pong ball, I ended up on the wikipedia page for table tennis and found a link to the International Table Tennis Federation. I've already found the standard dimensions to be 40mm diameter, but I want to make sure its correct and the ITTF should have the official rules and standards. Here[1] is the regulations pertaining to the ball in table tennis. It confirms the official diameter of 40mm. 

I googled for dimensions of school bus and found a technical report[2] from ntl.bts.gov on the dimensions of a large school bus, or ones that can carry 60 or 80 passengers. It should be a good lead on finding dimensions for an average school bus (48 passengers). Unfortunately the technical report turned out not to lead anywhere useful, so I'll try google again. I've found the website of Blue-Bird corporation, a manufacturer of school buses, and located their design brochure [3] for the Blue-Bird Vision, which seats 48-77 students. It should fit my requirements. The product brochure states the interior width to be 90 and 3/4 feet, the headroom to be 74 inches, and the overall length to be 289 to 499 inches, depending on floor plan. The average bus size I've already declared as 48 passengers, so I will make a reasonable assumption and assume that the smallest length indicates a 48 person floor plan. So we have our bus dimensions (289 inches by 74 inches by 90 and 3/4 feet) and the ping-pong ball dimensions (40mm). Now we need to look up the dimensions of the bus seats. I remember sitting two to a seat on the school bus, so there should be 24 seats total. A google search has yielded this regulations document[4] from the U.S. Department of Transportation. The transverse width of a bus seat with a minimum occupancy of two is stated to be between 760 and 989 mm. The height of a seat back (we're going to use buses after Oct, 2011 as the document requires at least the specified height, and before Oct, 2011 the specified height was lower) must be at least 24 inches. The cushion thickness is variable, but from my memory I recall them being around 5 inches thick. The one dimension we still dont have, and I haven't been able to find, is the width of the cushion (not the transverse width). There is an engineering diagram of a bus seat on the regulations document that shows the seat cushion with another dimension. Using these Ive estimated the seat cushion to be approximately 400mm wide, or approximately 16 inches. 

Now we'll calculate the net empty volume of the school bus, which is the volume of the school bus minus the volume of the seats. The volume of the school bus is 289 * 74 * (90.75 * 12) = 23,289,354 cubic inches, or 13,477 cubic feet. The latter number we got by dividing by 12^3. The volume of the seat we will calculate in two parts: the seat back and the seat bottom. For the seat width we will use the minimum value of 760mm which is approximately 30 inches. The seat back has a volume of 30 * 24 * 5 = 3600 cubic inches, or approximately 2 cubic feet. The seat cushion has a volume of 30 * 16 * 5 = 2400 cubic inches, or approximately 1.4 cubic feet. So the seat has a total volume of 3.4 cubic feet, and the the total volume of all the seats is 3.4 * 24 = 81.6 cubic feet. The net volume of the bus is 13,477 - 81.6 = 13,395.4 cubic feet.

To find the volume consumed by the ping-pong balls I am going to determine the volume they take up while packed together. For the packing arrangement of the ping-balls we will use something I learned in a Materials Science course, specifically the structure of crystals. To do this I will be referencing my textbook for the course Materials Science and Engineering: An Introduction[5]. Chapter 3 describes the structure of crystalline solids, which are composed of atoms. All crystals have a unit cell which is the smallest building block of the crystal. If you consider the ping-pong balls as atoms then they can be thought to form a crystal when packed together. Chapter 3 of the textbook details the different types of crystal structures. The body-centered cubic crystal structure is the one which will approximate the structure of the ping-pong ball crystal closest. The unit cell of this structure is cubic, which means its volume is determined by finding the cube of its length. This makes finding the volume taken up by the ping-pong balls relatively easy, as we only need to find the length of the unit cell. Page 48 gives a formula we can use to do this: length = ( 4 * Radius ) / sqrt( 3 ). Thus, the length of the unit cell is 4 * ( 40 mm ) / sqrt( 3 ) = 92.4 mm or .3 feet. Now the volume taken up by the unit cell is simply .3^3 = .027 cubic feet. One final thing we need is the number of ping-pong balls in the unit cell. This is done by counting how many balls are in the unit cell. Page 49 shows a diagram of the unit cell. From it we can clearly see that 2 whole balls are contained in the cell.

Finally we can find the net volume of the ping-pong balls contained in the unit cell. This is the net volume of the bus divided by the volume of the ping-pong ball unit cell multiplied by the number of balls contained in the unit cell. Thus: 13,395.4 / .023 * 2 = 1,164,817.4 ping-pong balls, rounded down to 1,164,817.

This is obviously an approximation as there are several things I did not take into account or I approximated. The most obvious being the dimensions I used. Some of them I could not find so I had to approximate based on memory. Another source of error would be in the crystal approximation. All crystal structures have imperfections, and I did not account for these, making the total estimate higher than it should be. Yet another source of error is the bus itself. The seats on the inside will take up space that the balls cannot fill. Some of this space will be the partial volume of a ball, forcing us to remove a whole ball when a whole ball's volume may not need removed. Additionally the materials of the bus interior are not perfectly flat, introducing other imperfections in the crystal structure. All of this means the number of ping-pong balls will be lower, probably in the area of 1,160,000.
